Uh, first up here is we have, uh, NA Treaty
negotiated John s here and looks like it's just yourself.
So thank you very much. Thank you for your submission.
And, uh, we've got, uh, 10 minutes put aside
for your time with us today.
So looking forward to hearing what you have to say.
Uh, former speaker, Adrian,
Steve
Aye,
John mc
also just say, uh,
uh, Mr.
Chair. Uh, we take my submission as read
and really I just wanted to amplify, uh, one
or two points, uh,
but to do so in the way to, and,
and to come in person, which is an opportunity, uh,
that we don't always have, uh, having lived at this part
of the world, uh, and not in Wellington.
Um, and so it's great to see the, the Select committee.
Um, I must say I bring apologies from my
pre-negotiated Jamie Watson.
Uh, Jamie lives right at the top of the, of the peninsula,
Uh, near Mojo at Fanta Bay,
and it's sort of like a, yeah, the geography.
So he's on, uh, childcare duties today, um, as just a young
man who's, who's just starting his family.
So Jamie, uh, hopefully is, uh, um,
is watching on the live, uh, string.
But the first off, just let me say that we have been, um,
well, and Jamie's predecessor, Leanne Normani, uh, Leanne
and myself have walked this pathway with Jill
and Nikki as their negotiators.
And we are Tamara negotiators
and, um, we support this bill.
That's the first point, I think, just to make
You are very clear and we are very pleased to see
that it's was evident, of course,
in the first, the first reading.
So we are really pleased
to see the positive cross party support that exists.
Uh, chair on this, um, as I've said in the submission,
it's been 38 years since the hierarchy claim,
which was Y 100.
It was later, um, uh, given a different name,
but it was lodged in 1987.
And the, the collective Y 100 claim is a piece
of legislation that sits in parliament at the moment.
It hasn't yet had its first reading, but,
but the iwi that are part of that collector for
Tutu supported that, um,
that claim right back there in 1987, um,
and was one of the 12.
Uh, but the representatives today
and what we have today is an Iwi specific, which is,
if you like, there are 12 iwi specific settlements, uh,
that will come before Parliament.
You've, um, most recently seen the first of those 12,
um, iwi, or actually probably technically the second,
the Nati PA one, which was on the same day,
but previously Nyai, um, has settled.
Um, and, and now we see Nati pwa.
And of course you'll be aware as the committee that, uh,
there are a couple of other waiting in the wings at second
reading completed waiting, third reading
and, uh, talk annuity.
So it is great to see these coming through now, um,
and, um, hopefully, uh,
in the not too distant future will be in that space as well.
So, um, it's important I think, to recognize
that while there are the iwi specific, the iwi of,
and of, we both benefit by the redress
that is sitting in the party Haki collective
settlement bill.
And that's an important point to link through,
that there's actually this sort of step stepping arrangement
where considerable redress fits in the region by design.
And because all 12 agreed on what were the things
that they could all agree if in common,
but there were things that needed to be iwi specific, quite
rightly so, and that's what we have today with the, um,
claims settlement, uh, bill.
So I think it's about 16 years since as Iwi negotiators
we walked, uh, the negotiating space.
That is Leanne and myself and most recently Jamie
and myself, with Jill and Nicky.
And it's been a tortuous process,
so hopefully you would've heard some of that.
And all I can just say is it's problematic.
The Crown tends to set us
a apart one against the other at different times,
which leads to, you know, aggravation and and so on.
But we get here today, we need to celebrate the fact
that this legislation is in, that has actually moved up
to this particular space.
And so we are here to say bloody good job.
We, we have two cultural, um,
vests back, uh, in, in conjunction with Na Ritu,
so Naati, Tamara and Nati, uh, Rahi Tumu.
We have two cultural vestings that we are a part
of together, and we also have two commercial
properties, one in Fang Matar the other here,
not far from here in, uh, in a commercial sense.
So the key point is that it's about the relationships
of our iwi, Tamara with ri
us supporting them at this point in time.
And we have been doing that
and working together despite the fact
that we had some disagreements
and they'll be the first to, to, you know,
we'll be the first to acknowledge we had some,
some strong disagreements in
that period from 2009 in the last 16 years.
But of the last couple, we've got to try and work.
We, you know, we, we, we walk back, shake hands,
embrace talk, uh,
and we do things together, small things or larger things.
So we know that as you go forward into the future,
we will be
In cultural redress and in commercial redress.
And that is by design, that is by agreement.
It's not a forced thing. Uh, and we support that.
So it is about the relationships
and it's about making sure that we, you know,
we can work together and we can acknowledge each other,
and particularly on this moment,
but also on the cultural spaces
and on the commercial spaces.
Um, I might just, um, leave it there.
Um, we, we say basically that we would urge you
to give favorable consideration, uh, to the bill in,
in your report back to Parliament.
Uh, please note that we, uh, are strongly, uh,
in support of this bill.
Uh, and also, um, please note if you would,
that we oppose any changes to the bill not sought by.
And I'll just, uh, leave it there Chair
Very much. Uh, John, uh,
please clarity for Thank you.
Just a comment. First of all, thank you very much for your,
um, submissions.
Um, it's rare that we get to hear from a
overlapping claimant and with such clarity
and succinctness, um,
and do it in a way, uh, that upholds the,
so I just wanna thank for that.
Um, don't really have, um,
I mean, have got wide experience in, in this situation
and have been through, um, a lot yourself.
So, uh, can you, um,
expand on, um, dealings with
and getting to, you know, getting that settled done?
Uh, well briefly, um, the,
the Haki settlement, if we look
collective settlement in the Haki settlements as a
Whole, At the
time that we started that crowd had the crown negotiated.
Mr. Dre and later Lee, uh, Rick Mark is here.
Um, and,
and today we, we have a new negotiator, um,
but crown negotiator, but,
but I guess the challenge was how do you work
through a collective agreement, a
collective agreement, but at the same time
and an parallel deal with the Iwi specifics.
And, and that I think was quite a challenge to all parties,
the Crown, and I'll just say the 12 iwi,
quite early on though, we realized that
the concerns of one iwi vis-a-vis another
of the iwi, this is within Hoki,
I'm talking about not in regard to the overlapping claims
with Iwi who are non hoki
and are external to our overall boundaries,
but dealing in, in, in the, within the 12
required quite a lot of just face-to-face discussions
and also being clear about what is it that we wanted,
what is it that they wanted?
And so there were, I can remember there were long list
and spreadsheets of like, and everything.
One of the big things was I think a strength
was the full disclosure of the crown at the time to all
of these properties across all of the 12 iwi, right?
So it's screeds and screeds of spreadsheets in terms of
what each one was looking for.
And then when you actually boil it all down, you kind
of understand that, you know, the mana the mana
of this iwi rests sort of, um, uh,
primarily it's a bit of a loaded term I'd have to say,
but primarily, but, but,
but there were places of nodes of mana, right?
And acknowledge that that Munga,
you know, is one of those nodes of, of, of mana of,
but also there are other layers
and other interests with other iwi, right?
And so that can be expressed by way of joint
cultural redress, or it could be expressed by joint, um,
commercial res if you like, you know, as,
as brutal as that seems.
But you know, you can do that
because you're looking at the business
because you're trying to look at the future
and look at development of properties together.
So I think it's was about talking, it's about,
it's about full disclosure.
Yeah. And, and, and, and it's about getting together,
but it doesn't stop the arguments because the motions
and those things are, are, are strongly held,
but at some point you've got
to resolve those and move on it.
Maybe comp compromise is a big thing,
but still some of that anguish sits there.
And that's why I think it's important for me
to be here today to acknowledge the fact that yes,
we have our ru but today we need to join hands.
And we have been doing that, I would say
for the last few years because this, this time of 16 years,
but particularly so many years now,
things have you got a chance to kind of,
it's allowed a space
and time for those relationships to start to,
to nip back together, I think
because it is not just the only one we have other, you know,
we have other redress with other iwi
and other iwi have redress with, but,
but the point is, it's a positive thing
because we are working together, we were able
to do those things at the collective level,
agree on all the big things, the co-governance of the moans,
the co-governance of the waterways, the Department
of Conservation lands, uh, and so on.
You see, we're able to deal with that.
But, but these other bits, when you get down to
that microcosm, those are the challenging bits, really.
And you've just got to take the leadership, I think,
and walk, walk together on it.
Yeah. So we think great. Go for it.
Questions. No, that's great.
No, that's been a very good submission, thank you.
Some lessons for us all that as well.
So thank you very much for coming forward today.
Appreciate it.
Right. Uh, Daniel, Brad in the corner somewhere.
Not a Problem. No problem.
Ben, you know, the story before is yours while you go. Um,
Your, Um, again, um, yeah, this is in my,
in my personal capacity
and as a, um, as an ancestor of, um, Timor
and, um, and, and Arena.
Um, I made this submission
and, uh, my, my first couple of points were just around, um,
I just wanted to get on the, to be honest around that,
I feel be the historical
Investigation That were going in both
in the aha in the Hoki and in the total Inquiry.
Um, do not tell our story com, um, completely.
And I just wanted to put the, put the that out there.
Um, and regarding Tumu, much was made of ofri, um,
and the Hoki side of it.
Um, but there's, there's very deep history and,
and UR connections that were, um, fully covered.
And, and so the total inquiry, um, Tim
was individually paid, um, five pounds for his,
his interest into Punti and, and in and through there.
So that's just all those, those first two points in my, um,
um, were, um, next, um, I, I talked to, um, the,
just the disconnection that, um, Nazi, uh, that, um,
the ancestors of, of, um, have, have endured.
Um, this, where you're sitting, sitting now, um,
this was Lipsy Town
and over there it was, uh, Morgan Morgantown.
There's a, there's a stream that runs down by the domain.
So those are early names for the suburb in that there, um,
we have, we have nothing left.
There's been a total, um, disconnect, um,
from our funeral from across, um, Morgan is in.
And that has been suffered both in our language, um,
and our access to the culture and who we are.
I've got tongue Elderly, um, relations that,
you know, they're only just realizing now what they've lost
and, and, um, and, um,
You know, Um, And, and the connection to it.
And that's why I'm just want to, you know, support the bill
and say this is massively important to the ancestors of, of,
of that.
We, um, this goes through
and it will enable us, give us the tools to reengage, um,
the whole, a whole, um, a massive group of of whanau,
um, that have gone off and become Depo.
Um, all of them will be aware of their, um, of,
of their connection to the aha,
but it's time to, to bring everyone back and,
and get the connection
and, you know, it would enable us to have ang
and reconnect without the wider w
and around we do, we need more people, we need lots
of good people, and we just sit down
and tell our stories together
and have some, some, some, some common ground.
Um, they sort of
to, to finish with them.
We got a, um, from,
he would, um, points at his past fights along the top
of the manga and say, um,
so
I'm the ancestor of, and my man will never be shaken.
Got it. Any, uh, questions for Dan?
Hey, thanks a lot for your personal submission, Dan.
Appreciate. Thank you. Okay. Uh, Michael Barker,
these are the, the old people tu
And they're all here.
Friends of Mata,
king Mata, take it for your time.
I live on, I'm,
and I've been there for 30 years.
Uh, my t and I presume it's been read yes,
um, is the, um, round acknowledgement
of the spiritual and physical damage to the monga.
And that's a matter of record, the damage through
The, uh, The road
to the summit, and particularly mining.
And, uh, the, um, the history
of the two e mine in particular is infamous.
In fact, it was a, uh, a precedent
as a result of the toy mine.
Um, governance were brought in no mining
unless there was protection, monetary protection.
So it was a precedent. The crown spent 25 million
rehabilitating the mine,
and that process goes on $25 million.
And that's ongoing.
My, is, we need to have absolutely
ironclad guarantees that this will never happen again.
And yet, and
yet there is a prospecting license application
by foreign mining company on the mountain
that's before the resource minister, Mr.
Shane Jones, that is present.
That application is ongoing
and that is being submitted even as we speak.
So be quite honest,
my suggestion is if we are honorable people,
honorable people, that will not proceed.
So the crown declares it's going
to create a process of healing.
If I was, if I saw that, I would say that's dishonorable.
That's my opinion. And so
that's, that is my today is is
that we need Absolutely.
I guarantees that the manga
will not be touched in the future.
That's, and I'll finish.
There's a tree growing on the mountain.
It's an ancient pori tree, and I'm the KU of that tree Ko,
but witness truth, and it's a symbol for our family, the,
and its lifetime, it has withstood thousands of storms,
and yet it still stands rooted firmly in the pen.
Its branches and canopies have provided home for flora
and fauna generations
and hopes hopefully will continue to do, uh, for many more.
And just as that tree stands firm, so too, with 90
Tui and whatever storms come,
we shall prevail.
Thank you. Very good. Got it.
Um, I'm interested to know if the mining application do,
does anybody of you know who get consulted on that
in that current structure?
Because I know the fast track, there's questions about,
um, we're only settled.
Iwi are certainly consulting.
That is all under review. Yep.
Has Chris Bishop Ya,
Chris Bishop is expert. We dunno,
We dunno. No. So
you're not carrying the loop on that application? No,
No.
Thank you. Any last points of clarity?
Okay, I guess. Thank you very much. Thank you. No problem.
Thank you. Right.
This, uh, brings us to the right of reply
for the, uh, the trust.
So, uh, if, if Daniel
and, uh, the trustees would like to return, are we able
to pop out there and grab Daniel?
So Dan, this is your right of reply, basically at the end,
and between you and your trustees, uh, it's your your
good time to, uh, talk at the conclusion of this process,
right?
When you
Thank you again. Um,
my final comments, I did have, um,
I did have quite a few here,
but, um, I think, you know, I'll just, I'll just say
that I acknowledge the comments, um,
and the communication from, from everyone and, and,
and what has, um, what has been said here.
Um, all I can say is that, um, our settlement trust deed
is in order to, to ensure a good, a good handover.
Um, and as the, as the, the chair of,
of NA trust
and the trust that I will, will guarantee that we will work
with the madai, the elected Mara committee, um, um,
um, to move the, the e forward and, and,
and settle, settle any, yeah, that is,
is high up on, on our priority.
And I'll give my guarantee, um, that we will, um, get in
and work with everyone, um, on, on that, on
that mid committee to ensure and have wider,
and, um, that's all I can say really.
Okay. Any of his, any other trustees.
Um,
and listening to the conversation that's been had,
and, uh, speaking to some of those key points, we recognize
that the communication
and the connection to our people is, is important.
And our connection to our is absolute.
Uh, we are there as a emotion
and emotionally charged outcomes.
We desire to ensure that haha process is put in place
for connect, reconnect to reaffirm our aka.
Just, and as we know, conversation
around whakapapa has been shared and is absolute.
Today our aka genealogy, as you know, it's family tree,
but also means to layer aka, is to create a layer.
We are, uh, at an important junction of our lives in terms
of another layer of prosperity.
So when reed stands by itself, moves with the wind,
and we cut, the wind come through the door,
and the door kind of got locked on us.
So we want the heal to help us heal, uh,
but we're all bound tightly together, and we can help.
The board has a strategic plan, uh,
and it's taken some time to get to that.
A big part of that strategic plan is the Restrengthening
need, um, outside the emotions
restrengthening the communication
and connection with our leaders at our marae,
with our leaders of the board.
And we are all leaders of our community.
We have a, a duty of care to look
after purpose planet and people.
And so when our leader talked about our holistic framework,
that's our strategic plan.
We've been running on our oily w uh,
and we sit here in a train station
and it kind of feels like we've been putting coal, uh,
to keep the, the train moving forward.
Um, and with the resources that we have, we want to elevate
that from a, um, a coal fired train to a swift
electric train that's gonna take us into the atmosphere, uh,
a sustainable atmosphere.
And so with, with the process that we've been, um,
that we've shared today, uh, we recognize, uh, the year
and now we look at the prosperity of the future.
And so with that in mind, and we stand here with our leader
as a board, uh, Daniel, Mike, myself, our two leaders,
and Mike, who's just left in terms of our cultural aspect.
Uh, and so we've got a duty of care
to take our people on the journey
with us, and we will do that.
And with the resources, uh, that we have that is,
are appropriately returned to us
and likened, we might have only got,
I think if the settlement was the door,
we've only got the door knocked back, uh, we'll use
that door knocked, break our door again, and,
and open it up so that our winds,
so we use the, the mantra of our springs, our moga,
the winds that come forth in our backyard
to help cast our people.
And so we're proud to be here to support the future
as leaders of our people.
And so maybe we, um, what can together
support of
our leadership.
So this brings us to the, uh, to the end of this, this,
uh, pa part of the process itself.
And, uh, on behalf of my, with
Steve Abel, honorable Jan, the right, honorable Adrian, um,
and also Kira
and myself, um, it's an honor to come to the place, the,
where we talk of these settlements.
We can easily keep ourselves in Wellington in the,
in the s there, but, uh, we all enjoy it.
I can tell you, uh, there is huge empathy amongst us all
for endeavoring to get better outcomes for Maori Maori Kato.
I, I say that genuinely,
and I'm privileged to, uh,
have the people alongside me on this journey of
what we have itself.
Uh, a lot has been said this morning.
Um, and, uh, you know, uh, Dan, I'm very pleased
with your comments in, in the role
that you play as the leader.
And that I, I think, uh,
that is exactly what needs to be done.
Uh, we need to get the walking the talk now with,
with regards to this.
This is, uh, as I say, um, the beginning of a, of a, of a,
uh, a new future, so to speak.
Uh, we've got a little way to, to run ourselves.
So the process for us is that we go away.
We've got plenty of questions to ask when we get down
to Wellington and start to reengage with our officials, um,
and considerations of that
before we write our report back to the house.
Once that happens, uh, when, uh, the time allows,
we'll be going back to the second reading the committee
of the whole house, and then the third reading.
Uh, and I have no doubt that that will be successful.
Uh, going through that before we get the royal ascent and,
and, uh, turning this bill into, into law
and getting the outcome that so many have actually,
uh, put an effort into.
And I acknowledge, uh, Rick, your presence yesterday
and the part that you played in this process
on behalf of The Crown as well.
Um, I'd like to thank, uh, the, the Clark's office staff
for, for everything you've done today.
Also, um, uh, staff as well and important journey.
But, um, importantly, um, to you, uh, you, you are
what, uh, gives us the, I suppose the, uh,
it's, it's, it's information.
We, we gather, we going through a,
a conversation like we've had this morning that allows us
to endeavor, to make the bill as strong as we possibly can.
That's what we do. I mean,
select committees receive a draft bill, we're endeavoring
to return it back to the house in a better
shape than we received it.
And this, this part here plays an important role in actually
us being able to achieve that.
So, uh, on, uh,
on behalf of the committee, thank you very much.
Uh,
I'm talking about the, although the room is more it,
um, I.